# plantpath_rev
Plant pathogen disease severity is shaped by genetic factors and pathogen lifecycle strategies across many pathogen-host systems
Temitope R. Folorunso1,*, Mekala Sundaram2, Neha Potnis3, Laurie Stevison4, Lori G. Eckhardt1, Janna R.Willoughby1
1.	College of Forestry, Wildlife, and Environment, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama
2.	Department of Infectious Disease, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
3.	Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama
4.	Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama
Drafted and in review

Abstract
The severity of plant diseases caused by phytopathogenic fungi is shaped by both genetic factors, pathogen infection strategies, and climatic conditions that influence both infection frequency and host tissue damage. This study aimed to quantify the variances in disease outcomes driven by virulence factors and pathogen infection strategies. To achieve this, we compiled and analyzed over 500 data points from experimental studies that compared disease outcomes between wild-type and knockout fungal strains, where genes suspected to influence pathogenicity were removed from the mutant line. We used Cohen’s d to calculate the effect size between measures of disease severity in these wild type and knockout pairs and a ridge regression to quantify associations between pathogen traits and effect size of disease severity. We found that knock outs of secreted enzyme, particularly cell wall degrading enzymes resulted in increased disease severity in the wildtype strain relative to the mutant strain (scaled estimate = 5.772, t = 4.142, p < 0.001). This suggest that these enzyme facilitate pathogen entry and tissue colonization across diverse host-pathogen systems. However, knockout strains with effector proteins removed exhibited significantly higher disease severity compared to wildtype strains (scaled estimate = -7.505, t = 5.491, p < 0.001 indicating potential redundancy or compensatory effects from other effector proteins within the genome. Furthermore, within the knockout-wildtype experiments, we also found that necrotrophic fungi (scaled estimate = 6.003, t = 5.304, p < 0.001) and those targeting roots and vascular tissues (scaled estimate = 2.510, t = 2.856, p = 0.004) resulted in larger disease effects in the wild type compared to the knockout. In contrast, waterborne fungi (scaled estimate = -5.056, t = 4.471, p < 0.001) and those targeting leaves and stems (scaled estimate = -2.656, t = 2.972, p = 0.003) exhibited smaller disease effects in the wild type compared to the knockout. Combined, this suggests that considering gene-specific effects requires consideration of the larger environmental and plant-pathogen system because disease severity in plant-pathogen systems is driven by both molecular-level virulence factors and ecological infection strategies. 

